# Upgrade v23.5.x-v24.5.x

This page describes the required steps to upgrade your Astarte cluster from `v23.5.x` to
`v24.5.x`. Your Astarte instance will **not** need to be upgraded.

> [!WARNING]  
> The old `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha1` APIs have been removed (`v24.5`).
> Make sure to follow the [upgrade guide](040-upgrade_10x_2211.html)
> if you are still using the `v1alpha1` APIs.

In the following, the upgrade path is described.

The upcoming sections will cover the following topics:
- upgrading the Astarte Operator,

Before starting with the upgrade procedure it is strongly advised to [backup your Astarte
resources](095-advanced_operations.html#backup-your-astarte-resources).

## Upgrade Astarte Operator
The Astarte Operator upgrade procedure is handled by Helm.

The current section assumes that the Operator's chart landing version is `v24.5.x`. It is **your
responsibility** referencing the proper `v24.5.x` chart using the `--version` flag when running
`helm` commands.

Please, make sure that the values you set for both the Operator's name and namespace match the
naming you already adopted when installing the Operator. A wrong naming can lead to a malfunctioning
Astarte cluster.

For standard deployments the following variables should be ok. However, it is your responsibility
checking that the values you set are consistent with your setup:

```bash
export ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME=astarte-operator
export ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAMESPACE=astarte-operator
export ASTARTE_OP_CHART_VERSION=<24.5.x>
```

Update your local Helm charts:
```bash
helm repo update
```

To upgrade the Operator use the dedicated `helm upgrade` command:
```bash
helm upgrade $ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME astarte/astarte-operator -n $ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAMESPACE \
  --version $ASTARTE_OP_CHART_VERSION
```

The optional `--version` switch allows to specify the version to upgrade to - when not specified,
the latest version will be fetched and used.

By design, Astarte Operator's Helm charts cannot univocally be mapped to Operator's releases in a
one-to-one relationship. However each chart is tied to a specific Operator's version, which is user
configurable.

Therefore, upgrading a chart leads to an Operator's upgrade if and only if the Operator's tag
referenced by the chart is changed. You can check the Operator's tag bound to the chart simply
running:

```bash
helm show values astarte/astarte-operator
```

As usual, you can use the `--version` flag to point to a specific chart version.
